>> Reporter: THIS IS THE SEASON
OF RUSSIA'S DISCONTENT.
UNDER PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN,
THERE'S BEEN A TACIT AGREEMENT
THAT PEOPLE ENJOY THEIR LIVES
AND STAY OUT OF POLITICS.
NOW, MANY RUSSIANS ARE DECIDING
THAT BARGAIN'S NO LONGER WORTH
IT.
>> (translated): UNTIL
RECENTLY, PEOPLE WERE THINKING
POLITICS WERE SOMEWHERE FAR
AWAY.
BUT NOW, PEOPLE UNDERSTAND
POLITICS HITS CLOSE TO HOME.
>> Reporter: 38-YEAR-OLD ALEXEY
KOTOROV AND HIS NEIGHBORS HAD
CONSIDERED THEMSELVES
APOLITICAL, BUT THEY LAUNCHED
THESE PROTESTS WHEN THE CITY OF
MOSCOW PLANNED TO EVICT THEM
FROM THEIR APARTMENTS TO KNOCK
THEM DOWN AND BUILD HIGH RISES.
AS ALWAYS, POLICE PRESENCE WAS
STRONG.
BUT SOME RUSSIANS' FEAR OF THEIR
STATE SEEMS TO BE FADING, AND
FAITH IN THEMSELVES, RISING.
DO YOU THINK YOU CAN MAKE A
DIFFERENCE?
>> (translated): WE CAN CHANGE
THINGS IF WE STAY TOGETHER.
WE NEED TO STAY ACTIVE.
IT'S VERY IMPORTANT RIGHT NOW TO
RECREATE CIVIL SOCIETY.
FOR THE LAST FIVE YEARS, CIVIL
SOCIETY HAS ALMOST DISAPPEARED.
>> Reporter: IN THE 1960s, THE
FORMER SOVIET UNION BUILT
KOTOREV'S APARTMENT COMPLEX AS
INEXPENSIVE HOUSING...
>> SO, THIS IS YOUR HOME?
>> THIS IS MY HOME.
>> Reporter: ...FOR PEOPLE LIKE
HIM TO HAVE THEIR OWN SPACE.
INSIDE, IT'S NICE, WITH A VIEW
OF THE MOSCOW RIVER.
KOTOREV ACCUSES LOCAL OFFICIALS
OF WANTING TO SEIZE VALUABLE
LAND TO GET RICH.
>> (translated): NOW IS A VERY
IMPORTANT MOMENT.
THE PEOPLE ARE STARTING TO UNITE
TO SHOW THE GOVERNMENT THEIR
POINT OF VIEW.
>> Reporter: THE MAN MOST
RESPONSIBLE FOR CREATING THAT
UNITY IS ALEXEI NAVALNY.
THE 41-YEAR-OLD LAWYER IS THE
COUNTRY'S MOST PROMINENT
OPPOSITION POLITICIAN ON A
CRUSADE AGAINST CORRUPTION.
HE CALLS THE RULING UNITED
RUSSIA PARTY, "THE PARTY OF
CROOKS AND THIEVES."
IN MARCH, HE POSTED AN HOUR-LONG
YOUTUBE EXPOSE ABOUT MANSIONS,
YACHTS AND LAND THAT HE SAYS
WERE CORRUPTLY ACQUIRED BY
PUTIN'S PRIME MINISTER, DMITRY
MEDVEDEV.
>> (translated): MEDVEDEV CAN
STEAL SO MUCH AND SO OPENLY
BECAUSE PUTIN DOES THE SAME, BUT
ON A GREATER SCALE.
THE SYSTEM IS SO ROTTEN, THERE'S
NOTHING HEALTHY LEFT.
>> Reporter: NAVALNY'S BEEN
FIGHTING PUTIN FOR SIX YEARS.
IN 2011, HE SPARKED MASSIVE
PROTESTS AHEAD OF A
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTION HE CALLED
RIGGED.
>> (translated): IT'S VERY
SIMPLE: POWER TO THE PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: TWO YEARS LATER, HE
RAN UNSUCCESSFULLY FOR MOSCOW
MAYOR AGAINST THE PUTIN-BACKED
INCUMBENT.
TODAY, BY USING YOUTUBE, NAVALNY
CIRCUMVENTS STATE-RUN MEDIA AND
MAINTAINS A HUGE FOLLOWING.
THIS VIDEO HAS 23 MILLION VIEWS.
>> (translated): THIS IS OUR
COUNTRY, AND THESE SWINDLERS ARE
STEALING OUR MONEY.
EVERYONE SHOULD FIGHT HOWEVER HE
CAN.
>> Reporter: TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE ANSWERED HIS CALL.
ON MARCH 26 AND JUNE 12,
RUSSIANS LAUNCHED THE MOST
WIDESPREAD UNSANCTIONED PROTESTS
IN A QUARTER CENTURY.
THEY WERE HELD IN 185 CITIES.
NEARLY ALL THE PROTESTERS WERE
YOUNG AND MOTIVATED TO SPEAK OUT
BY CORRUPTION.
"PUTIN'S A THIEF," THEY CHANTED.
"POLICE, JOIN THE PEOPLE," THEY
SAY.
"DON'T SERVE THE GOVERNMENT OF
MONSTERS."
POLICE DECLINED THEIR INVITATION
AND ARRESTED 1,700 PROTESTERS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, INCLUDING
NAVALNY.
HE WAS SENTENCED TO 25 DAYS IN
JAIL FOR ORGANIZING AN
UNSANCTIONED RALLY.
HE WAS ALSO ARRESTED AND JAILED
IN MARCH.
AND BACK IN 2014, HE WAS
CONVICTED OF A FELONY:
DEFRAUDING CLIENTS OF A SHIPPING
COMPANY HE HELPED HIS BROTHER,
OLEG, START.
OLEG REMAINS IN PRISON.
ALEXEI CALLS HIS BROTHER A
HOSTAGE AND THE CHARGES
FABRICATED, BUT HIS CONVICTION
MEANS LEGALLY HE CAN'T RUN FOR
OFFICE.
THAT HASN'T STOPPED HIM FROM
CAMPAIGNING FOR NEXT YEAR'S
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
>> (translated): WE DO NOT OWE
THE GOVERNMENT ANYTHING.
IT IS THE GOVERNMENT WHO OWES
US.
THEY BUILD AN AUTHORITARIAN
REGIME THAT DOESN'T GIVE
ANYTHING BACK.
>> Reporter: HIS RALLIES ARE
UNUSUAL IN A COUNTRY WHERE
RETAIL CAMPAIGNING IS ALMOST
UNHEARD OF.
THE CROWDS ARE YOUNG, AND HE
TALKS LIKE THEM.
>> (translated): THEY THINK WE
HAVE NO RIGHT TO ASK QUESTIONS,
THAT WE HAVE TO SHUT UP AND
LISTEN.
THEY TELL US, "(BLEEP) YOU,"
AND WE HAVE TO SAY, "OH, OKAY,
WE'RE VERY SORRY."
BUT NO, WE HAVE GATHERED HERE TO
SAY WE'RE GOING TO ASK THESE
QUESTIONS, AND WE'LL OBTAIN THE
ANSWERS.
>> HIS ANTI... ANTI-CORRUPTION
MESSAGE RESONATES WITH ME, AND I
THINK THAT HE'S A VERY
CHARISMATIC POLITICIAN.
>> Reporter: 23-YEAR-OLD KIRIL
KOZLOVSKY-- AND ANYONE IN THE
CROWD WHO WANTED ONE-- GOT A
PHOTO WITH NAVALNY.
KOZLOVKSY PROMPTLY POSTED IT TO
HIS PROFILE ON VK, RUSSIA'S
EQUIVALENT OF FACEBOOK.
KOSLOVSKY ACKNOWLEDGES THAT
PUTIN HAS BROUGHT RELATIVE
PROSPERITY TO RUSSIA.
HE'S NOT EVEN OLD ENOUGH TO
REMEMBER THE POLITICAL AND
ECONOMIC CHAOS THAT PUTIN HELPED
END WHEN HE CAME TO POWER IN
1999.
WHAT WOULD YOU SAY TO YOUR
PARENTS OR GRANDPARENTS WHO SAY,
"LOOK, THINGS WERE A LOT WORSE
FOR US BEFORE PRESIDENT PUTIN"?
>> IN THE 18 YEARS THAT HAVE
PASSED, HE AND HIS TEAM COULD
HAVE DONE A LOT MORE TO HELP THE
SITUATION, A LOT MORE TO MAKE IT
BETTER.
AND HE DIDN'T.
SO, HE'S TO BLAME FOR THIS.
>> Reporter: IN CHEBOKSARY, 375
MILES EAST OF MOSCOW, THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT MADE SURE NO ONE IN
THE CITY CENTER WOULD RENT SPACE
TO THE NAVALNY CAMPAIGN, SO HIS
GATHERINGS TAKE PLACE ON THE
EDGE OF TOWNS, LIKE THIS
APARTMENT COMPLEX.
SEMYON KOCHKIN IS THE LOCAL
CAMPAIGN MANAGER.
>> (translated): WE WERE
REJECTED BY ALL THE LANDLORDS,
BY ALL THE HOTELS, EVEN THE
INTERNATIONAL HOTELS.
EVEN CONSTRUCTION FIELDS
REJECTED US.
>> Reporter: KOCHKIN SAYS HE'S
BEEN TARGETED PERSONALLY.
LAST YEAR, ON VK, HE POSTED A
CLIP FROM COMEDIAN JOHN OLIVER'S
HBO PROGRAM, "LAST WEEK
TONIGHT."
>> SCAMMING ISIS IS THE BEST
THING ANYONE DID ON EARTH THIS
WEEK!
>> Reporter: THE VIDEO SHOWS
BANNED ISIS SYMBOLS, AND KOCHKIN
WAS ARRESTED FOR EXTREMISM.
HE TOOK A SELFIE IN THE BACK OF
A POLICE CAR.
HE ACCUSES THE GOVERNMENT OF
EXPLOITING ANTI-TERRORISM LAWS
TO SILENCE NAVALNY'S CAMPAIGN.
>> (translated): WE ARE
CONSTANTLY FIGHTING WITH THE
AUTHORITIES, AND IT'S ALWAYS
ONE-SIDED.
BECAUSE WHEN IT COMES TO
ELECTION SEASON, THEY MAKE IT
IMPOSSIBLE.
♪
>> Reporter: LOCAL POLICE ALSO
ARRESTED 35-YEAR-OLD ANDREI
USIPOV.
HE'S THE LOCAL ORCHESTRA'S FIRST
VIOLIN.
ON MARCH 26, HE JOINED THE
NAVALNY PROTEST, AND, A WEEK
LATER, POLICE INTERRUPTED A
REHEARSAL TO TAKE HIM TO JAIL.
I ASKED HIM IF HE THOUGHT HE'D
BE ARRESTED FOR PROTESTING IF
NAVALNY WERE PRESIDENT.
>> (translated): I AM
ABSOLUTELY CERTAIN THIS WOULD
NOT HAPPEN BECAUSE, UNDER ALEXEI
NAVALNY, THE COUNTRY WILL BE
MORE OPEN.
ALEXEI IS FOR TRANSPARENCY, AND
ONLY WITH TRANSPARENCY CAN WE
OVERPOWER CORRUPTION.
>> Reporter: ARRESTS ARE ONLY
ONE WAY THE RUSSIAN
ESTABLISHMENT PUSHES BACK.
STATE TV PORTRAYS NAVALNY'S
PROTESTS AS AN EXISTENTIAL
THREAT TO RUSSIA'S STABILITY.
LISTEN TO WHAT THE COUNTRY'S
MOST POPULAR ANCHOR SAID LAST
MONTH:
>> (translated): THEY USE
PEOPLE TO PROVOKE THE CROWD AND
MAKE THE SITUATION SPIRAL OUT OF
CONTROL, ACHIEVING CHAOS.
FIRST, IN ONE SQUARE IN ONE
CITY, AND THEN THEY PLUNGE THE
ENTIRE COUNTRY INTO POVERTY
AND-- I'M AFRAID TO SAY-- CIVIL
WAR.
>> Reporter: GOVERNMENT-RUN HIGH
SCHOOLS FORCE STUDENTS TO WATCH
A VIDEO COMPARING NAVALNY TO
HITLER, ACCUSING HIM OF BEING A
FASCIST TRYING TO UNDERMINE THE
STATE.
BUT FOR THE FIRST TIME IN A
GENERATION, YOUNG PEOPLE ARE
REJECTING THE GOVERNMENT'S
TALKING POINTS.
IN A CLASSROOM 2,000 MILES FROM
MOSCOW, STUDENTS POSTED A VIDEO
OF THEMSELVES CHALLENGING A
GOVERNMENT-FUNDED SCHOOL TEACHER
WHO CALLED NAVALNY'S SUPPORTERS
FREAKS AND DEFENDED CORRUPTION.
>> Reporter: THE PRESSURE ON
NAVALNY HIMSELF IS SOMETIMES
PHYSICAL.
LAST YEAR, MEMBERS OF THE PRO-
GOVERNMENT COSSACKS DOUSED
NAVALNY WITH MILK AND BEAT UP
HIS STAFF.
IN APRIL, A STATE TV CHANNEL
SHOWED AN ASSAILANT AFTER HE
SPRAYED NAVALNY WITH GREEN DYE
AND CHEMICALS.
NAVALNY'S RIGHT EYE NEEDED
SURGERY.
NAVALNY ACCUSED THE KREMLIN OF
ORGANIZING THE ATTACK.
>> (translated): EVEN IF I
LOOK LIKE THIS, DOES THAT MEAN
THAT WE WILL ACCEPT MONEY'S BEEN
STOLEN AND USED TO BUY YACHTS?
I DON'T THINK SO.
>> Reporter: NAVALNY'S POLL
NUMBERS REMAIN LOW, BUT HE'S
CHANGING PUBLIC OPINION.
TWO-THIRDS OF RUSSIANS NOW
IDENTIFY CORRUPTION AS THE
COUNTRY'S NUMBER ONE PROBLEM.
PRESIDENT PUTIN AVOIDS
RESPONDING TO NAVALNY
SUBSTANTIVELY.
BUT THE NAVALNY EFFECT MEANS AT
A TOWN HALL IN MOSCOW, WHERE
QUESTIONS ARE USUALLY SCREENED
IN ADVANCE, THIS TEENAGER DARED
TO ASK PUTIN ABOUT CORRUPT
OFFICIALS UNDERMINING THE
PUBLIC'S FAITH IN GOVERNMENT.
>> (translated): HOW ARE YOU
PLANNING TO SOLVE THIS PROBLEM?
>> Reporter: PUTIN RESPONDED:
>> (translated): YOU READ YOUR
QUESTION.
DID YOU PREPARE IT YOURSELF, OR
DID SOMEONE PUT YOU UP TO IT?
>> (translated): LIFE PREPARED
ME FOR THIS QUESTION.
(LAUGHTER AND APPLAUSE)
>> Reporter: WHILE HE'S INSPIRED
THE YOUNGER GENERATION, SOME
FELLOW PUTIN OPPONENTS CRITICIZE
NAVALNY FOR BEING A NATIVIST.
SIX YEARS AGO, HE RELEASED
VIDEOS COMPARING IMMIGRANTS WHO
WORK IN RUSSIA TO COCKROACHES.
NAVALNY STANDS BY THE VIDEOS AND
SAYS HE WANTS TO APPEAL TO
NATIONALISTS, WHICH IS WHY HE
RARELY CRITICIZES PUTIN'S
MUSCULAR AND POPULAR FOREIGN
POLICY IN UKRAINE AND SYRIA.
NAVALNY TURNS DOWN INTERVIEW
REQUESTS-- INCLUDING OURS-- AND
TRIES TO KEEP THE FOCUS ON
CORRUPTION.
YOU SAVE YOUR HARSHEST CRITICISM
OF THE PRESIDENT FOR HIS
DOMESTIC POLICY, OBVIOUSLY, NOT
HIS FOREIGN POLICY.
IN FACT, YOU DON'T TALK VERY
MUCH ABOUT HIS FOREIGN POLICY.
IS THAT BECAUSE YOU AGREE WITH
MOST OF IT?
>> (translated): I DON'T TALK
A LOT ABOUT FOREIGN POLICY
BECAUSE HERE EVERYONE IS
INTERESTED IN WAGES, INCOME AND
BAD ROADS.
>> Reporter: HE TRIES TO FEED
POPULISM TO AN AUDIENCE THAT'S
HUNGRY.
HE HIGHLIGHTS GOVERNMENT
CORRUPTION TO PEOPLE WHO FEEL
THEY HAVE NOTHING TO LOSE.
AND HE'S TRYING TO CONVINCE A
GENERATION-- AND PERHAPS THE
COUNTRY-- THAT POLITICS REQUIRES
PARTICIPATION.